Have you ever been so angry you want to throw something? What about so angry
you wanted to throw someone? Well this is a story about how this badass got
got to do that exact thing. Let’s take a look at the scene.
There’s a battle going on. The Iranians are fighting the Turkish army. Here we have some
particularly brave soldiers hiding behind some rocks and watching. And here we have some actually brave
soldiers tangled in the midst of battle. It’s chaos here, hooves are flying, weapons are everywhere.
And this unfortunate soul lost track of the pointy end of his enemy’s spear for a second too long.
And here we are faced with the gruesome reality of battle—blood and body parts scattered everywhere.
It’s been a bloodbath.
But look! This is Rustam, our Iranian hero, the man of the hour! And who does he have
helpless in his strong grasp—none other than the Turkish king himself, the ‘malevolent Afrasiyab’!
It seems so effortless, one hand grasping his belt, the other on his collar, completely in control.
Afrasiyab’s men are rushing to help him, but they are way too late.
If it weren’t because Afrasiyab’s belt ended up snapping in Rustam’s hand, he would be a dead man.
As it was, the lucky div merely took a tumble to the ground, was quickly
reached by his chieftains, and rescued from Rustam’s ferocity.
Fun fact: This is Rustam’s first battle and he wanted to distinguish himself among the
heroes and chieftains with whom he was fighting. So who did he choose to go after?
The big fish. The Man. So while his men were out here being jumped by Turkish soldiers,
he broke through the ranks, grabbed Afrasiyab, and he scared him so badly that Afrasiyab
basically jumped on the nearest fast horse and booked it, leaving his army to be
routed by the Iranians. This feat of bravery and strength earned Rustam titles like
“the shelter of the host”, “the Lion”, and “the Mountain”. Afrasiyab himself reported
that “No lion has such strength, his feet touch earth / His head is in the clouds”.
This shows Rustam’s strength and might. And that even with his own prowess,
Afrasiyab was “but a fibre in his grasp”.
This scene marks an important turning point for Rustam. This is when he starts to
be recognized as the hero that he is. The incredible strength shown in this scene is just
one example of many that Rustam will go on to show throughout the rest of the Shahnama,
distinguishing him from the many strong soldiers and chieftains encountered in this story.
Yes, Rustam is not the only strong soldier to appear in this episode, but it is his courage,
bravery, and prowess on the battlefield that sets him apart from the rest.
Without a doubt, Rustam is portrayed as the man that not only the Iranian people, but the
Iranian king himself, can trust to save the day, to keep them safe,
and to win the battle for them.